ROSANA: Marcos, ¿te he presentado a mi prima, Laura?
MARCOS: No, no creo. ¿Quién es ella?
ROSANA: Es la hija de mi tío Victor, el hermano de mi mamá.
MARCOS: O sea, ¿ustedes son primas hermanas?
ROSANA: Claro. Su papá y mi mamá son hermanos. Déjame presentarte.
ROSANA: Marcos, have I introduced ya' to my cousin, Laura?
MARCOS: No, no I don't believe so. Who is she?
ROSANA: She's the daughter of my Uncle Victor, my mom's brother.
MARCOS: So then, you guys are first cousins?
ROSANA: Right. Her dad and my mom are siblings. Let me introduce ya'.
POST CONVERSATION BANTER
Allan: That’s a classic situation, not just meeting people, but being introduced to relatives.
Lizzie: Sí, la familia es muy importante en la cultura latina.
Allan: Sin duda. Lizzie, ¿tienes una familia grande o chica?
Lizzie: Pequeñita. Solo vivo con mi mamá.
Allan: It’s pretty small, Lizzie. A wife, two kids, a dog, a hamster, and of course, the in-laws.
Lizzie: A hamster?
Allan: Now that we’ve gone through the conversation, what do you say we run through some of the vocabulary?
Lizzie: Sounds like a good idea.
Allan: So let’s begin with…
VOCAB LIST
Lizzie: presentar
Allan: To introduce.
Lizzie: presentar, presentar
Allan: Next we have…
Lizzie: presentado
Allan: Introduced.
Lizzie: presentado, presentado
Allan: Next we have…
Lizzie: primo, prima
Allan: Cousin.
Lizzie: primo, prima. primo, prima
Allan: Next we’ll hear…
Lizzie: hijo, hija
Allan: Son, daughter, children.
Lizzie: hijo, hija. hijo, hija
Allan: Now let’s hear…
Lizzie: tío, tía
Allan: Uncle, aunt.
Lizzie: tío, tía. tío, tía
Allan: And finally…
Lizzie: hermano, hermana
Allan: Brother, sister, siblings.
Lizzie: hermano, hermana, hermano, hermana
Allan: And now, guys, a quick tip to keep your Spanish nice and crisp. The word presentado.
Lizzie: presentado
Allan: In Spanish, you’ll find that many words end in ADO, A-D-O, and IDO, I-D-O, just like we see here in presentado.
Lizzie: Or like hablado and comido.
Allan: Exactly. Now, the thing is when we’re speaking quickly, it’s not uncommon to kind of drop that letter D in the ending and say presentao.
VOCAB AND PHRASE USAGE
Lizzie: presentao
Allan: But it’s probably something you should get in the habit of hearing more than saying.
Lizzie: Ahora estudiemos como se empleaban algunos de estos vocablos en la conversación de hoy.
Allan: ¿Por dónde deseas empezar?
Lizzie: Empecemos con el sustantivo hermano.
Allan: Alright, and this noun can be either masculine, hermano, or feminine, hermana.
Lizzie: Y como sustantivo masculino, ‘qué significa?
Allan: As a masculine noun, it means “brother” in the singular, that is. In the plural it has two meanings.
Lizzie: ¿Y cuáles son?
Allan: Well, it can mean “brothers”, which should come as no surprise, but it can also mean siblings since in Spanish the masculine plural is preferred to make up for the lack of a neutral form. So when we’re talking about a group of males and females, we’ll use the masculine plural form.
Lizzie: ¿Y el sustantivo femenino?
Allan: That just means “sister” in the singular and “sisters” in the plural.
Lizzie: Hermano, hermanos, hermana, hermanas.
Allan: Lizzie, ¿Cómo se llama el hijo de tu tío?
Lizzie: Se llama Pablo.
Allan: ¿Enserio?
Lizzie: Es mi primo.
Allan: So the son of your uncle is your primo, your cousin. This is a great word. Aside from referring to someone in your family, it’s also used to refer to what we might call in English a family friend or extended family.
Lizzie: Right. Like if you’re invited over to my house and my cousins meet you. They might start calling you primo to make you feel like you’re part of the family.
Allan: Right. That’s so nice. And with this one, too, we can use it as a masculine or feminine noun, even though we’ll always translate it as “cousin”.
Lizzie: Primo, primos, prima, primas.
Allan: So, moving on, what’s another way to refer to the son of your uncle?
Lizzie: es el hijo de mi tío.
Allan: Hey, we’re on a roll. Another noun that can be either masculine or feminine. And this one, like hermano, has two different translations depending on the gender.
Lizzie: La forma masculina hijo.
Allan: So in the masculine singular this means “son”, and in the feminine, Lizzie?
Lizzie: Hija.
Allan: “Daughter”. But, again, when we’re talking about sons and daughters, we’re going to need to use the masculine plural form hijos, and this means “children”.
Lizzie: Alright, last word.
Allan: Let’s go for four in a row.
Lizzie: ¡Cómo no!
Allan: Tio y tia.
Lizzie: Pues, no es nada más que “uncle” and “aunt”.
Allan: And your tios. How do you say tios in English?
Lizzie: I prefer not to answer. Can we talk about something else?
Allan: Come on. No, it’s an unfair question. There’s no clean translation for the word tios. We have to describe it and say “aunts and uncles”.
Lizzie: Prosigamos con la gramática. .